tumors cannot grow larger than the head
of a ballpoint pen the tip of a
ballpoint pen until it gets a blood
supply no oxygen no nutrients no growth
all right but when cancer is actually
able to get this blood supply they start
taking off they can grow 16 000 times in
two weeks so it's an angiogenesis is a
trigger to propel cancer growth one of
the things that's so profound about your
approach is you've compared the response
to all kinds of diseases to a drug and
then the response to food as if it were
a drug and it really literally of the
chills right now just saying that it it
is astonishing how you can get a
response from eating food whether it's
pomegranates increasing the mucosal
layer in your intestines or many many
other things which I'm sure you will
rattle through some of here shortly uh
that if you saw a drug that gave that
kind of response it would be a
multi-billion dollar drug and people be
losing their minds but the fact that
it's food becomes even hard to test for
walk us through some of the early
realizations that you had around that
and I've heard you talk about how as an
oncologist it's easy to get you know
um
oh God what are the the chemotherapy
drugs and test it out in your lab but if
you ask the same thing about what the
response would be for broccoli or
something it's like nobody they look at
you sort of sideways
um talk to me about food as a drug
yeah so first of all food is medicine is
a an ancient concept and if you go back
to the ancient societies and ancient
cultures like Greek culture or Asian
culture food isn't just food it's not
it's a sustenance you know it's actually
part of our lives and part of our Lives
is actually what we eat influences our
bodies um here's how I came into this
you know very honestly I'm not one of
these doctors that basically you know
quit modern medicine and then poo pooed
in a shoot prescription drugs like I
just told you I I've actually been
involved with developing biotech drugs
so I I believe that new medications can
be really really important for the right
person at the right time in the right
situation
however
I started to realize that because I
helped to develop many of the systems to
develop drugs that we were not taking it
full advantage of all these testing
systems right
um and and to just to flesh out how I
have explained it I I'm a cancer
researcher so I I've done a lot of
research with in cancer labs and I can
tell you you can go on the internet
click on some chemo drug or whatever
have it FedEx to you by um by a mail
order have it arrived the next day put a
a little um a spoonful of the chemo drug
into a into an experiment and within a
few days or maybe even a few hours you
would know using this test system
whether or not the drug is effective
against cancer whether it's activity
okay now you can pick up the phone and
you can call on a pizza or a salad and
have it delivered in 15 minutes and you
ask the same cancer researcher how do I
study what the onions do what do what
does the anchovies do what choose a you
know what does their lettuce do and they
would scratch their heads and say I have
no idea so that's what I did
10 years ago is to tackle that challenge
of of bringing two World Cup making Two
Worlds Collide the world of
biotechnology where we have like you
can't believe how sophisticated some of
these testing systems are and that's
what's amazing because you can throw in
the drugs too and you can throw in the
foods and then you can compare them side
by side so
um uh my area is in the field of
angiogenesis how the body grows blood
vessels for years cancer researchers
were finding trying to find ways to cut
off the blood supply that feed cancers
so the cancer doesn't get a blood supply
it's just this microscopic thing and it
can't grow in fact tumors cannot grow
larger than the head of a ballpoint pen
the tip of a ballpoint pen until it gets
a blood supply no oxygen no nutrients no
growth all right but when cancer is
actually able to get this blood supply
they start taking off they can grow 16
000 times in two weeks so it's an
angiogenesis is a trigger to propel
cancer growth so finding drugs that can
inhibit androgenesis or stop blood
vessels are going to tumors was at one
point kind of a Holy Grail it was you
know like how do we get that lots of
drugs I've been involved with the whole
thing
and now there are actually lots of real
FDA approved drugs but we were able to
study Foods in that same system foods
and some of the foods soybeans grapes
strawberries lemons and it was crazy to
actually see
um because I have the street cred of
being able to study against the biotech
drugs that pound for pound
ounce per ounce molecule for molecule
um uh in in many cases the food held
their own against the drug some cases
more powerful obviously some foods are
not as powerful but that actually opens
the Gateway for a whole new future and I
think that's something that's really
exciting to watch no joke do we know
what's going on at the molecular level
is it a metabolite that our microbiome
produces when
um breaking down grapes that's stopping
the angiogenesis or is it something else
yeah so
um so mother nature in creating Foods
um have at least these foods with
natural chemicals right
um these are called bioactives and
they're called bioactives because
they're biologically active and in a
plant let's look at a strawberry for
example okay the tartness of
strawberries you know they're
strawberries are sweet and tart the
tartness comes from an acid
unsurprisingly called elogic acid okay
and so you know when a strawberry is a
little tartar because it's got more
logic acid so
um electric acid is a powerful starver
of cancer so cuts off does that actually
end up in our bloodstream like can could
I eat strawberries and then you could
draw my blood and be like you had seven
strawberries absolutely that is insane
okay now but here's here's even more
insane part what are these what are
these spinal actors doing in the plant
they are part of the plant's Health
defense system
so these natural chemicals help the
plant defend themselves when we eat them
they have another job description they
do double duty and they actually help to
activate our own body self-defense now
here's one thing that I think is a
practical
um value you know for a long time people
are sort of talking about like man you
know like you should eat more organic
and don't need pesticides and stuff like
that here's a whole new take on this
okay and this is kind of smoking hot
information
um
pesticides actually kill insects so that
the plants look better the leaves aren't
as chewed up and usually the fruits or
vegetables look a little bit better too
right that's just agriculture makes it
look better on the product look better
on the Shelf organic doesn't use that
and so a lot of times you get you have
the more natural you know the bugs are
nipping at the leaves and chewing at the
stems guess what
Mother Nature created things like
electric acid As Natural insecticides
and so basically when the um the plant
the strawberry plants being chewed on it
makes more logic acid to repel the bugs
it's a wound healing response and a
defensive response so organic foods have
more bioactives as a reaction I just was
involved with the study I was meeting
about yesterday talking about coffee
organic versus conventionally grown
coffee conventional grown coffee with
pesticides organic coffee
hands down this is a study at the
University of Warsaw University
um hands down a pound per pound of
coffee bean organic coffee has more
bioactives than the pesticide treated
coffee because the insects the Natural
Things the environment cause it to
create more natural health offenses
dude this yeah this gets incredible I
can't believe I'm this deep in my
journey of health and all that and I
never realized that the actual chemical
compounds from food I always thought it
was the metabolites from the digestive
process that was making its way into the
bloodstream which I know also happens
also happens
yeah that's uh that's really intriguing
so one thing we actually haven't talked
a lot about which is your specialty is
angiogenesis so when we eat something
that has an anti-angiogenesis benefit is
it
like ubiquitous across every blood
vessel in the body or is it doing
something
creating some sort of knock-on effect
like the antibody drip that we're
getting where it's somehow selectively
targeting things that are over producing
something
great question let me kind of um frame
it in uh first framing about
angiogenesis in general so when we were
in our mom's whoops okay and sperm met
egg and started to form a little ball of
cells that didn't look anything like a
person yet it started to create little
organs and start to create shape the
first organs that could created are
blood vessels our circulation is the
first thing that gets created so our
blood supply our circulation is very
much a part of who we are and I
mentioned that we have 60 000 miles
worth of blood vessels just to give you
a sense of how extraordinarily big that
is if you were to pull out all the blood
vessels from from you or me and line
them up end to end that would form a
thread that would go around the earth
twice huge okay it is insane now
um our every single cell in our body
every organ require relies on just the
right amount of blood flow so they're
getting fed with oxygen and nutrients
they don't need more than just the right
amount and but if they don't have it
enough our body has to be able to grow
more okay this having just the right
amount I call it the Goldilocks zone so
Goldilocks remember the the the story
um you know the Bears went in there and
it's not too hot not too cold not too
hard not too soft or our health defenses
including angiogenesis
is exactly the same way not too much and
not too little but just the right amount
so this just right Zone exists for our
blood vessels our stem cells our
microbiome our DNA kind of balance as
well as our immune system it's all about
homeostasis the term you used earlier
just the right amount now that means our
body knows how to grow more when it's
necessary
and then when there's enough it stops
and there's too much it's kind of like a
gardener you know that sees your
lawnmower growing it mows the lunge mows
it right back down until it gets to the
right height okay our body's Health
defenses when they're working at their
best is like a perfectly manicured lot
not too much not too little just the
right amount to be able to uh to to go
around like playing like rounds of golf
on a perfect course now
um what tumors do is they hijack this
process and so they like a tumor is
sitting on a golf course it just grows
extra weeds and grass righteous for
itself so that's what gets targeted your
body tries to fight that off but
sometimes we need some extra help for it
that extra help can be a smart bomb drug
that we designed to Target those extra
blood vessels or we can help our body
mow the lawn by eating foods that have
anti-angiogenic or blood vessel mowing
capacity you'll never be able to get rid
of them all it's just bad back down to
the body's set point so what's an
example of a drug that can actually do
this there's monoclonal antibodies that
are designed like smart bombs to take
out tumor blood vessels but foods can
actually do it too now why can drugs and
Foods Target a tumor blood vessel and
not take down your aorta or the blood
vessels feeding your brain like your
carotid artery it's because when we
build the healthy blood vessels we take
our body takes great care to construct
them to be very very strong it's like
building a skyscraper okay The
Architects and the contractors and their
Craftsmen they make everything perfect
as perfect as they can but when a tumor
does it you know it doesn't it's not a
careful contractor that's like a lousy
contractor just throws the the thing up
and so the blood vessels are grown are
flimsy they're fragile they're unstable
and so think about you know a hurricane
like Eric and Ida sweeps through the
area and the strong sturdy struck
structures are healthy blood vessels are
going to stay up even when the wind is
there all the ones that are not well
constructed the wind blows them right
down and that's why a tumor blood vessel
is much more vulnerable to either food
or drug
wow that that's really incredible okay
so you wrote the book Eat to beat
disease we've touched on a little bit
but now I think it's worth what what is
your sort of General I know that there's
never going to be a one-size-fits all
it's very important for people to
understand but in terms of General uh
patterns of eating to be disease what
are those General patterns yeah well
first of all um when I wrote UTP disease
which became a New York Times bestseller
uh the whole point was not about writing
about a diet
it's not keto it's not South Beach it's
not about weight loss even it's really
about health and because when I was
doing my research to look at different
foods that would activate our health
defenses
here's the first thing I was surprised
by it's not like one food or two Foods
or five foods or yeah it was more than
200 different kinds of foods and they
were fruits and they were vegetables
they were spices and they were legumes
and they were different kinds of seafood
including shellfish and they were
different kinds of fish Beyond salmon
okay
um and and there's even some dairy
products that can actually have some
benefits as well including fermented
foods like yogurt and sauerkraut and
kimchi and these foods are so ubiquitous
that they are found in the traditional
cultures of every single Society but
especially Mediterranean diet which we
know is healthier for us as a pattern
and Asian food which all we also know is
healthier and so what I started to
realize is that eating to beat disease
is not just picking a particular disease
and trying to figure out what the recipe
is that the one size fits all but it's
really a journey that we have our whole
lives from the time we're small until we
get old old we get older parents have
the opportunity to actually start
feeding their children when as soon as
they're taking solid food foods that can
actually help them beat disease in fact
in fact breastfeeding is actually
helping your child
um beat Disease by shaping and sculpting
their microbiome right one of the health
defense systems so I came up with 200
different foods I laid them all out
According to which health defense
systems they activate some cases they
activate all of the health defense
systems I call those grand Slammers
because man a single food will knock out
you know knock the five Health defenses
out of the park it's a home run to eat
those things and I explain all the
research has been done by myself and
other people to show how they actually
work so what's the principle to eat to
be disease you can love your food to
love your health
love your food to love your health that
seems so contradictory to what we used
to think about healthy food right
because the old thinking is that oh you
got to eat healthy you got to cut out
everything you love you know and and I'm
I'm turning that upside down inside out
I'm inverting the whole equation I'm
saying if you look at those 200 foods
that I put down on my book need to be
disease take them Sharpie out and circle
the ones that you love already I like
this I like that one Tomatoes I like oh
man I like this one okay that's a great
starting point because if you start
eating those Foods you're already ahead
of the game because you already love
foods that can actually eat that can
activate your health defenses now you
can explore expand your horizons by
choosing these other foods that are out
there as well have you sat on TV and
watched your food the Food Network
you can find all these people
experimenting with different ingredients
if you go onto YouTube you can look for
an ingredient you don't recognize bitter
melon the heck is a bitter melon well
it's an Asian gourd is it bitter
absolutely but there are ways of
actually cooking it so it's not so
bitter and it has medicinal value well
how would I do it click on YouTube and
search on recipe cooking bitter melon
and you'll watch somebody teach it to
you so love your food to love your
health explore with your life and just
know the foods I put in the book
activate your body's Health defenses
right and some of the things I know
you've recommended historically mostly
plant-based you talk about getting some
omega-3 from Marine sources uh whether
it's from fish or whether it's from uh
I I think you talk about seaweed you'd
have to refresh my memory
um
you do personally eat some meat though I
don't know if you eat any red meat or
not I know you recommend that people cut
that down uh extra virgin olive oil
um things like that am I missing any of
the the heavy hitting advice
well I mean so here's here's the basic
thing
um all the research scientific research
has been done and the epidemiological
the public health research shows that
eating a plant-based mostly plant-based
diet that that's pretty broad you know
um uh fruits vegetables legumes nuts
healthy oils good for you you should eat
most of mostly that
doesn't mean and by the way plant-based
could be tricky because a lot of ultra
processed foods also have plant
materials in it
processed soy all kinds of other things
all kinds of unhealthy oils made from
Plants however if it's whole plant-based
Foods
it's kind of stuff you'd find in a
grocery store or a farmer's market okay
like I would say mostly go for those
mostly go for those okay
um uh Seafood has been shown to improve
survival and decrease the risk of death
if you eat two or three servings of of
seafood shelf it could be fish or
shellfish you get a healthy omega-3
fatty acids is that per day
per week two to three servings per week
and the amount you would eat which I
write a whole chapter about food doses
amount you would eat is about three
ounces so people like well wait I'm not
a human scale I have no idea what three
ounces is what I would say it's a lot
less than you think it is a piece of
fish about the size of a deck of playing
cards you can put it in your palm it's
about yay it's about as thick as a stick
of playing cards not that big a deal and
you know um and and people who love
seafood can can get a lot of it that way
recently there was an interesting study
that showed if you actually increase
your level of Omega-3s by an extra
serving a week or two like from wherever
you are with your starting point you can
increase your longevity your Survival by
4.7 years
so an extra serving of of
Omega-3 Rich Seafood you increase your
Survival by LifeTime Survival by 4.7
years now you can get if you're a vegan
or a vegetarian you can get Omega-3s
from plant-based Foods so chia seeds
flax seeds some of the nuts you can get
those as well but what in plant-based
Foods you get a different kind of
substrate to make your Omega-3s so you
got to eat a lot more of it so you know
um I I I like diversity so um plant
whole plant-based Foods Seafoods if you
actually eat fish if you don't explore
it if it's not for some ethical reason
um and then you know look uh and dairy
by the way you know when it comes to
Food and Health there's no universals
okay some dairy products you know like
honestly cheeses are good for the
microbiome because many traditionally
made cheeses not in large quantities
they've got saturated fats and a lot of
salt but some cheese actually have
lactobacillus and other healthy gut
bacteria that we can use as a probiotic
food yogurt a dairy product probiotic
food and so I'm all about the science
wherever the science takes me is where
the evidence takes me there's a great
American novelist named El doctoro and
he had this great uh quote he once said
writing is a novelist writing is like
driving at night
um you can't see beyond your headlights
but you can make the whole trip that way
and that's what science is like you just
can only see where your headlights are
going and you're focusing on the
evidence and ignoring all the darkness
that's out actually out there so what
about meat okay
um I can tell you that most of the
research has been pretty convincing that
if you eat a lot of red meat okay which
was really only done for the last
70 years or so like you know since the
1950s before that most societies didn't
have were not prosperous enough to have
a ton of meat around okay and and now we
have an abundance of meat that we've
industrialized meat and all the things
that are not so good for us but um all
the studies show that eating a lot of
red meat
and all the Studies have shown that
eating processed Meats we're talking
about our sausages and the pepperonis
and all kinds of other hot dogs all that
kind of stuff
um that's been classified by the World
Health Organization as a carcinogen by
the way processed meats you know once in
a while especially that's something you
really enjoy don't worry about it knock
yourself out enjoy it but do not do it
all the time and if you can cut it down
or cut it out
more power to you better for you and so
this whole idea about you know life is
for the living got to enjoy our how we
do things you know some things we enjoy
aren't that good for us you know some
people like to roll down the windows or
take the top down and drive really fast
on a road faster than the speed limit
just don't do it all the time because
one of these times you're gonna actually
get into an accident right what is up my
friend Tom bilyu here and I have a big
question to ask you how would you rate
your level of personal discipline on a
scale of one to ten if your answer is
anything less than a ten I've got
something cool for you and let me tell
you right now discipline by its very
nature means compelling yourself to do
difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact I will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right I've just released a class from
Impact Theory university called how to
build Ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work I will see you inside
this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until then my friends be
legendary peace out
and so I think that idea of moderation
but if you're informed by science and
you can actually then listen to your
body if you feel like crap after eating
something don't go for it don't eat it
the next time or eat less of it the the
science is just so rich at this point in
time in history that you know anybody
that wants to get into food as medicine
as a science not as a friend but as a
real science has a huge future ahead of
them the urgency is that our metabolic
Health globally is in a terrible place
I mean a third of American adults has
hypertension a 10 of of kids age 12 to
18 has hypertension that's crazy it is
uh 50 of adult Americans will be obese
by the year 2030 not just overweight but
obese so we are you know our life
expectancy is declining is it that it's
actually declined oh it's declining
dramatically
before covet it began so people said
well because of covet people are dying
earlier and you know the truth of the
matter is that this metabolic
derangement bodes for a much worse
outcome as it relates to covet they're
tracking that like yeah it's been
published yeah you measure uric acid at
admission and it predicts to some degree
who's going to end up in the ICU who's
going to end up on a vet and who's going
to die now that we recognize uric acid
and its role in disturbing metabolism
and its role in inflammation and its
role in increasing what is called
oxidative stress the damaging effects of
free radicals it was looked at and lo
and behold look what they're finding
what is uric acid like what what is it
what triggers the unhealthy elevation so
uric acid is a very simple chemical and
it is the end product of the metabolism
in the human body and the bodies of
other animals of only three things
alcohol something called purines which
are the breakdown products of DNA and
RNA and by Far and Away fructose
so to me
we've known that fructose is a demon for
a long long time and you in 1970 it was
published in the Journal of the Lancet
that fructose is a player it is a big
player and yet
we were told that because fructose
doesn't cause insulin to be secreted and
doesn't need insulin to be metabolized
therefore it was a safer sugar and you
know we recognize how industry was able
to manipulate that messaging and how
everybody fell for it but if insulin
really is like one of these high risk
factors and fructose doesn't require
insulin why isn't it that is the well
I'd say million dollar question that's
the 500 billion dollar question that's
how much we subsidize the growth of corn
to make high fructose corn syrup today
with that as a premise that look it
should be safe because it doesn't need
insulin to be metabolized it is a
powerful threat as it relates to type 2
diabetes because it stimulates a couple
of things number one is gluconeogenesis
the creation of glucose in your body de
novo in the liver and uric acid enhances
that process and it causes what is
called insulin resistance meaning that
insulin doesn't work as well in your
body through a number of mechanisms so
that's the dirty secret of fructose that
the industry didn't want us to know
about now it's been called out so
fructose can only be metabolized in the
liver
why as it turns out it can be
metabolized in various other tissues in
the body even including the brain we
learned about the liver but even the
kidney can metabolize fructose so the
the story you know everyone everything's
been compartmentalized but now we know
that it's a lot a lot bigger story we
know that glucose can become fructose
high glucose levels especially when
blood turn into can become fructose
through the use through the body's use
of a an enzyme called aldose reduction
reductase that is enhanced when serum
sodium is higher so higher levels of
salt leads the body to know that it is
in it's getting ready for famine or
water restriction make more salt it
actually create we retain more salt and
we make fructose out of glucose fructose
is the signal then that prepares us for
not having any food which is really
quite intriguing so fructose found in
nature I would assume primarily in Fruit
right so fructose food sugar that's
where it comes so what is it about the
natural appearance of fruit that warns
because fruits what's Spring right or so
it's fruits fall late summer and that's
what happens when you live in L.A late
summer and early uh fall that's kind of
right so it's like hey it's really for
our ancestors I mean now you have fruit
360. right like I literally have no idea
yeah so but traditionally it is the late
summer and early fall when the wild
blueberries would ripen and our
proclivity to finding sweet things a
survival mechanism deep in your brain
and the brain of every human walking the
planet makes us gravitate towards sweet
we we consume fructose and that triggers
a powerful mechanism in our bodies to
make fat to store fat to lock it up to
make more blood sugar to power our
brains to raise our blood our blood
pressure
so these are powerful survival
mechanisms that happened you know
probably 14 to 17 million years ago when
in the middle myosin period when the
world cooled and for our primate
ancestors that was a survival pressure
and those who had mutations in the genes
that have to do with uric acid made more
uric acid which alerted their bodies to
make more fat now those are the only
only primates that survived they passed
it on to you and me and to every human
such that when we are exposed to
fructose it's telling our bodies get
ready four times of food scarcity um
so the idea of
higher blood sugar and insulin
resistance and all those terrible
metabolic things that we're doing our
damnedest right now to Target
those were wonderful adaptations for us
for more than 99 of our time on this
planet what's happened is now we still
have the old genome
but we've challenged it with a new
environment that is rich in fructose
that is more sedentary we're not doing
as much we're not sleeping as well
restoratively and and therefore uric
acid is increasing and worsening our
metabolism and leading to this host of
diseases that we talked about
hope you enjoyed the episode brought to
you by our sponsor ombre labs for 30 off
your at-home gut health test go to
tryombre.com forward slash impact enjoy
the episode
okay so what's your take on fruit itself
like is that to be avoided or that's a
million dollar question so fruit is a is
on the table because of the fiber
content fiber bioflavonoids and
importantly vitamin C so vitamin C
dramatically helps with your excretion
of uric acid so your net negative in
terms of uric acid by eating an apple a
day by eating a couple of apples a day a
handful of grapes and certain fruits are
actually associated with lowering your
uric acid like tart cherries hence the O
in the book cover CDO I do indeed it's
the falling Cherry nicely done so okay
so we're in taking all of this excess
fructose used to be good for us now it's
becoming a problem uh the end of that
metabolic train is uric acid uric acid
used to be or it has a role but not in
the elevated levels that we're talking
about now
uric acid is in these elevated levels is
causing inflammation it is there
anything else going on or is it simply
this cytokine drip oh no it's there's a
lot going on and let's double click on
something I think is really interesting
vis-a-visa news that happened today
one of the things that uric acid does it
inhibits nitric oxide
now not to be too technical but we need
nitric oxide
for many reasons two of which are it
allows blood vessels to open up
improving blood supply
when there's not enough nitric oxide
there's not enough blood supply
it also facilitates how insulin Works to
keep our blood sugar in check
and not having function of nitric oxide
compromises blood supply and compromises
how insulin works so our blood sugar
will go up the reason I say that is
there are drugs that increase nitric
oxide
one of them is Viagra as an as a matter
of fact there's a time and a place when
you a person might need not you a person
might need more blood supply for
erectile dysfunction
uh and a study was published this
morning
showing
that people who take men who take Viagra
It's associated with a 70 reduction in
risk for Alzheimer's
can you imagine and this is not the
first study more blood supply to the
brain also a reduction in the formation
of what's called tile protein in the
brain but think about it that might well
explain why elevation of uric acid is
associated with an 80 increased risk of
dementia a 55 increased risk of
Alzheimer's specifically and a 165
percent increased risk of vascular
dementia because it's actually lowering
our no
it is lowering the functionality of
nitric oxide okay so we have the nitric
oxide in the system but it's unable to
do its thing because the elevated
presence of uric acid and important I
think a lot of people get the nitric
oxide blood supply
relationship but the the the tying
nitric oxide into how insulin works is a
relatively new idea
so uh you know that's been demonstrated
in animals and then in humans that you
know that's an important function that's
compromised by uric acid so yes we
talked about inflammation cytokine storm
cytokine dribble this nitric oxide story
is actually very important as well how
does it interface with insulin because
we need nitric oxide for two things
how insulin is able to get through the
blood vessel into to then Target the
insulin receptor and then how it's able
to bring blood sugar into the cell doing
its job to help lower blood sugar so the
vasodilation to pull that you need
that's how insulin makes its way through
the blood vessel to get to the muscle
and or liver cells to do its job in
terms of the sequestration of blood
sugar if you will for the formation of
of glycogen okay so that would predict
then if the elevated levels of uric acid
cause my vasculature to be too
constricted now I basically am leaving
the glucose in my bloodstream I'm
probably then going to secrete more and
more insulin trying desperately to get
it out because the mechanisms don't
realize that this isn't a lack of
insulin problem this is a vasodilation
problem I'm too constricted I can't get
out I can't reach the muscle cell I
can't reach the fat cells uh that's
really interesting it's really
interesting it's a big problem because
that leads to insulin resistance insulin
doesn't do its job and you know insulin
resistance is devastating for the brain
well the brain requires glucose so we
can understand from that perspective but
insulin is a powerful trophic hormone
for the brain it nurtures brain cells if
you want to grow brain cells in a in a
Petri dish let's say you nurture them
with insulin and that's how they grow so
you know insulin has far more important
roles you know beyond just its role in
regulating blood sugar so insulin
permits
the glucose receptors at the blood-brain
barrier to allow glucose to get into the
brain to power the brain cells if you
will so it's a very big story so
why might this be why would your what
would be the upside of having uric acid
create insulin resistance and therefore
cause blood sugar to go up why because
when you're starving it'll help power
your brain
because you know we're not the fastest
we're not the strongest but we have a
big brain in relation to our bodies so
that's been our Ace in the Hole it's
been our high card that we can play
during times of
you know either starvation or predation
so we need our brains to keep us able to
get food and to keep us from becoming
food and that's not a real concern these
days right but in the day we needed to
make sure we didn't get eaten
one of the chapters in the book is
called survival of the fattest I assume
this is what we're talking about yeah
and it's not like our Prime ancestors
were got fat and we're you know we're
lying around being fat they just have a
little bit a little Edge that superpower
a little extra body fat so that you know
for that extended period of time when
there wasn't food they would be the ones
to survive they were able to lay down
that fat and survive because they had a
mutation in this Gene what the eurocase
genes so they couldn't break down uric
acid their uric acid levels would go up
trigger their fat production and they
would survive
help me understand that mechanism in
light of what we just walked through so
elevated uric acid constriction of the
blood vessels the glucose stays in the
system how is it getting me to lay down
the fat if the glucose molecule or the
insulin molecule is having a hard time
getting the glucose molecule into the
cell other mechanisms so we only cover
two so far the next would be oxidative
stress so elevated uric acid profoundly
increases what is called oxidative
stress when mitochondria in the cell are
exposed to higher levels of oxygen
stress they are less functional and that
triggers that's one of those stresses in
the body that triggers fat production
and that becomes a really interesting
story that we didn't cover specifically
in the book
but I think it's fascinating nonetheless
because it's similar and that is why do
we as human beings
not make vitamin C I mean you know
that's a fact we've you've talked about
it before and I I think we have to talk
about that because it's not as well it
sucks to be human we don't make vitamin
C you got to make sure you're not a
limey and you eat enough lunch you don't
get scurvy so that your teeth don't fall
out and your kids aren't born naked or
whatever happens when you have a
girlfriend right well I think it's
interesting because
um
this oxidative stress triggers fat
production which was a good thing
it's again
fat production a good thing being coming
a little fatter is a good thing yes in
the through the lens of our history of
being primates or even hunter-gatherers
and increasing oxidative stress by not
having vitamin C would have been looked
at looked upon as being a good thing
through that lens again and what also
cause us to then seek out the fruit
those who would seek out the fruit would
survive get enough vitamin C to survive
during times of food scarcity
Okay so
now as we take this into a modern
context
um we know that it served us for a while
but now we're getting we have so much
fructose coming into the diet our levels
are going up so high we're constricting
the blood vessels going back to what you
said about
um Viagra like that just that if that
ends up holding I mean that's like a
miracle drug a 70 decrease in the
likelihood of Alzheimer's is crazy
I would take a five percent decrease in
Alzheimer's risk and I think it's fair
to say that you know getting your
metabolic house in order is a powerful
way to decrease your Alzheimer's risk we
know that to be true we know if you're a
type 2 diabetic you've quadrupled your
risk for that disease Alzheimer's for
which there is no medical treatment as
you and I have this conversation right
now despite the exciting news of several
months ago of a new miracle drug that
gets you know that that limits beta
amyloid uh what happened with that was
really quite
um encouraging you know it was resoundly
rejected by the neurology world and
rightfully so because it doesn't work we
don't have a drug to prevent that
disease and yet we really understand
where it's coming from it's coming from
Disturbed metabolism
it's been said that Alzheimer's is not
generally a genetic disease and I would
until recently have agreed with that
saying that yeah about four percent of
Alzheimer's have familial type
Alzheimer's disease you know there are
populations around the world South
America for example where it runs quite
strongly in families
I would tell you now that it's probably
a 100 percent genetic
as is type 2 diabetes I would say it's
genetic and you're looking at me saying
where are you going to go with this and
let me go let me let me play it out
because as I've mentioned earlier
what we're seeing now are these
metabolic derangements that underlie
these diseases that represent
a disconnect between evolution and
environment
so we have this genome
that's coding for our survival
in the context of a different
environment
now that we're challenging that genome
with a new set of circumstances a new
context looking at it through a
different lens if you will it's
expressing genes that are Paving the way
for our metabolic Decline and setting
the stage for the very things we don't
want to get
and I have to tell you that language is
something that came to me I think the
night before last as I was just lying in
bed thinking about this stuff that it is
absolutely a genetic uh disease in that
context of the mismatch and
we're living then with physiology and
and a body a machine that is uh you know
mismatched with our current environment
it's outdated machinery and I I realized
before I wrote drop acid that I had
written about that topic a half century
ago
and I wrote a an op-ed in the Miami
Herald about what about us living today
with the outdated Machinery that is more
suited to the environment of our
ancestors
and uh I I saved it I was 16 years old
when I wrote that article I saved it I
put it in the book and um
that's the issue is that it's the
foundation of the Paleo movement let's
try to recapitulate the environment of
our of our ancestors both just in terms
of other activities sleep and exercise
physical activity stress but mostly the
foods that we eat if we can emulate what
our our genome expects will have better
health
all right so it's a good transition to
the love diet which you describe in the
book so walk us through what does Luv
stand for
how do we get that match relined up
again let's say that diet is
one of the biggest players and I think
perhaps the most important
so love means lower uric values and it's
the diet that we constructed that can be
um used as a lens through which you
could look at your dietary preferences
or your dietary Dogma if you will
whether it's keto vegan paleo all of
those diets and others can be adapted to
be more conducive to lowering your uric
acid values uh it means as things that
we've talked about
being very cognizant of purines of
alcohol specific types of alcohol and
certainly when you recognize that 70 of
the manufactured Foods in America today
in other words if it has a bar code and
it's in the grocery store it has added
sweetener 70 do and by and large that
comes from high fructose there's the
villain corn syrup that we subsidize to
the tune of 500 billion dollars a year
so um
it's time to call that out
I wrote a an op-ed it was an open letter
to President Biden February 21st of this
year with Dr Casey means uh saying that
you know these um nutrition
recommendations that last for five years
for the United States that are put up by
the USDA allow uh indicate that 10
percent of our daily calories coming
from sugar is okay
the I wouldn't say there's no science
that would support that but 99 of the
science uh that was provided to the
Review Committee for that Dogma or that
Doctrine
said that's way too much that six
percent should come or less from sugar
so our Hope was that we could get some
new language that would rewrite you know
that uh that five-year recommendation
but how many people do you think steer
by the recommendation
a lot really oh my gosh like people
actually pick up the box in the military
no no I'm talking about in terms of of
government influence that the military
and schools and federal uh food programs
they say 10 they you know then they're
there for these foods that are
manufactured they have all this added
sugar fair game oof
that's and what does that do it creates
the very illnesses that are bankrupting
our Health Care system so that don't
make no sense to me no it does not uh
I'm guessing that that hasn't been
adopted that we're still at 10
um so we've got sugar hiding everywhere
what are things that are high in purines
that we should be paying attention to
um like one one thing I definitely want
to talk about is red meat
um but where else are we going to find
like if we know that DNA and RNA is in
everything then I I don't even
understand to be honest how some things
are higher or lower but it has to do
with the cellularity and the
concentration the more cells it has as
opposed to other things give me a dense
Cellular One dense Cellular One be a
like a small fish like a sardine or an
anchovy is more really dense
well let's just say with it meat or in
our products for one second we'll get to
that in a second as opposed to chicken
or really just the space between the
cells is the space between it's that
density it's the uh the real cellularity
of uh organ meat for example liver and
kidney very high in purines so they will
they're directly involved in their
metabolism breakdown of the DNA and RNA
then to make uric acid but it doesn't
necessarily mean
as we segue to fruits and vegetables
that all foods that are high in purines
are going to raise uric acid so that's a
bit of a disconnect that we finally have
massaged into being meaningful because
for years well for years it was foods
high in purines if you have gout stay
away from them because we know purines
mercuric acid we know high in uric acid
is the cause of gout what what is gout
so gout is the
extracellular crystallization of uric
acid where uric acid is so high that it
finally precipitates out it's like
um making rock candy you've ever made
rock candy in the day all right well how
do you make rock candy is
um you have a solution of sugar and you
heat it and it because it's hot you can
dilute more sugar and then as it cools
if you have a thread in there it'll
crystallize on the thread and you pull
it out and you've got rock candy I mean
you're eating sugar there's nothing else
there right anyway so things precipitate
out when their concentration is really
hot I've seen it like on people's elbows
and stuff it's toast crazy and it
crystallized why it picks the greatest
rake through the skin can they can open
up and be hugely painful in fact you
know we humans are not the only animals
at risk for that other animals that have
high uric acid like reptiles and birds
uh
T-Rex sue the T-Rex had uh gout in her
fossilized skeleton but wait in in such
a natural environment how are they
ending up getting out they're just
eating things that are too they're
eating other lizards and they're just
too high in in who can say I mean I
don't think we know exactly what T-Rex
ate but you know it looks based upon
teeth and short digestive tract that
they ate meat you know they were these
you know prototypic carnivores and as
such were at higher risk for gout segues
back to us as humans so it doesn't mean
that people who eat a lot of meat are
necessarily going to get gout and may
not even have a high level of uric acid
but it takes us to a place it really
depends on the person so therefore you
want to check your uric acid but here's
how do you check your uric acid it's a
blood test and over the counter yes
that's the good news but most people
have already had their uric acid checked
it's part of your annual blood test and
and you could call your doctor and say
what's my uric acid and she or he would
say well it's either normal or not if
it's above seven it's abnormal it's out
of the normal range and below seven
you're in the clear but understand Tom
this is only in the context of gout not
metabolic health
so for metabolic Health we want it not
in the normal range in the Optimal
Health which is range 5.5 or lower okay
that's what the Research indicates is
the cutoff in terms of cardio metabolic
issues so having higher uric acid levels
one interesting study published in 2009
looked at 42 000 men 48 000 women
followed them for eight years
those who had the highest level of uric
acid had a 16 increased risk of all
cause mortality becoming a dead person
for any reason whatsoever that's what
the term means cardiovascular mortality
38 why might that be we talked about
nitric oxide we talked about blood flow
we talked about inflammation of the
arteries for example stroke risk death
from stroke 35 increased risk and here's
an interesting part of that study I
thought
for people looking at their values for
every point of uric acid elevation over
seven
all-cause mortality increased 8 to 13 oh
God so at eight at nine at ten you know
you see people with a uric acid level of
11. oh that's a big big study the other
thing the study showed which I thought
was really quite interesting
They concluded that one-fourth of all
type 2 diabetes was a consequence of
elevated uric acid what
one of the things I discovered way back
then
was that we evolve in concert with the
plants that we're eating or the animals
that were eating but back then we were
eating leaves and there's actually now
evidence that the thing that makes us
human as opposed to a chimpanzee is
there's a distinct change in the gut
microbiome between when chimps and
gorillas evolved off and we evolved out
and you can actually tell a human being
by their distinctive gut microbiome
instead of a chimpanzee for instance we
share 98 of all of our genetic material
with chimps and gorillas and yet we're
profoundly different and What Makes Us
profoundly different from them is not
our genes it's actually the genes of our
microbiome unfortunately my wife has had
some very real experience with just how
important the microbiome is you're the
only person I've ever heard talk about
that I'd love to do or more about that
so if we were going to prove your thesis
out and what would we be doing to the
diet to create that effect in the
microbiome that would Express so it's
such a radically different species
lectins are plant proteins that are one
of the major defense systems of a plant
against being eaten one of the things
that's hard for us to con conceptualize
is that plants do not want to be eaten
they actually have a life and they were
actually here first
when insects arrived plants had a
problem because they couldn't run they
couldn't fight they couldn't hide but
they have a huge advantage and that's
their chemists they can turn sunlight
into matter and we haven't figured out
how to do that yet so what they do is
they make proteins that are sometimes
called sticky proteins or lectins that
stick to certain sugar molecules in US
particularly in our gut lining
just by the way if anybody has sinusitis
or runny noses when they eat certain
foods you are actually producing sugar
molecules in your mucus to trap lectins
and I have so many people who had
chronic sinusitis including myself when
we finally got lectins out of our diet
they completely went away
so lectins bind to sugar molecules
lectins cause the wall of our gut to
actually separate and people have heard
the term leaky gut
I used to if you'd asked me 15 years ago
if I thought leaky gut was a was a
problem I would have said it was
pseudoscience now with the advances in
understanding how the microbiome works
and in understanding how lectins work
I think everyone who has a disease has a
leaky gut now I'm pretty dumb
Hippocrates said this 2500 years ago
that all disease begins in the gut so
one of the things we know about research
is research is research look again
because somebody already knew this and
Hippocrates knew it 2500 years ago it's
really interesting and I I have heard
that quote so many times and it's one
that I just accept and go oh wow what a
great Insight what do you think led him
to that at even now people have a hard
time conceptualizing the microbiome
because it's invisible so how did he
come to that conclusion he had this
interesting theory he believed that we
all any creature has what he called the
translation is Green Life Force energy
that actually wants perfect health for
that creature and that it's a driving
force unfortunately he believed as I do
that there were external forces that
were preventing that expression of Green
Life Force energy so he thought the
purpose of a physician was to identify
those external forces that were keeping
the Green Life Force energy from
expressing itself and remove them or
teach the patient to remove them and
then the patient would heal him or
herself because the Green Life Force
energy would take over now that sounds
kind of new age and touchy-feely but he
was absolutely right and one of the
things that I guess I and other people
have discovered is that one of those
external contributing factors are
lectins and if you remove move certain
lectins things you'll start to heal
yourself let me give you another example
if we're out on the ocean in a boat and
the boat Springs a leak in the bottom of
the boat and water is rushing in
we have two options the one option is we
grab a bucket and we start bailing the
bigger the hole is like the old
commercial we're going to need a bigger
bucket
and I think that most systems for
healing the gut are just giving people
buckets to bail whatever because it's a
lot easier to plug the dumb hole and
then you don't need buckets and so if
lectins are one of the major ways that
we get leaky gut then if we get lectins
out of our diet that's how we plug the
holes unfortunately for us the lining of
the gut is only one cell thick and so
imagine one cell thickness keeping
everything you eat or everything living
in you like bacteria separated from you
and they're all held together locked arm
and arm with tight junctions so what Dr
Fasano showed with gluten which is a
lectin is that gluten makes its trouble
by causing leaky gut so once those
spaces are open not only do lectins get
through which are foreign proteins
they're splinters but also pieces of
bacteria called or living bacteria also
get through the wall
now on the other side of the wall
is your border patrol your immune system
and 65 percent of all the white cells in
our body are up against this wall
why are they there because that's where
the problem is going to happen if it's
going to happen
so when these foreign proteins get
across the wall the immune system
basically sounds the alarm sounds the
air raid sirens we go to threat level
five we scramble the fighter jets and we
actually go to war status
and as I talk about in the book that war
status has manifested in multiple ways
whether it's brain fog whether it's
arthritis whether it's depression or
anxiety whether it's coronary artery
disease which is how I got interested in
it in the first place and all of these
things come right back to what
Hippocrates said 2500 years ago
that if you want to cure the disease
head to the gut and I see this for
instance I had so many allergies as a
young adult and in college that I had to
get all allergy shots and you know oh
you're allergic to things well my
allergies were just because my immune
system was just on hyper overload I
don't have any allergies anymore I
didn't outgrow my allergies
through the last 17 years I've told my
immune system to chill out there's
nothing to be interested in here because
there's nothing coming across the border
that's super interesting probably about
three months ago I started getting
really itchy and then just like in like
my chest would itch like crazy my
backwood is like crazy I'm like what is
going on because I'm really religious on
my diet I don't cheat on my diet but a
couple times a year like I'm really
hardcore about it and then it started
with like a little spot on my neck and
then it was like I had to wear like long
sleeve everything I was just one big
rash it was it was insane and I've never
had anything like that in my life
and so I was like this I know this is
something I'm eating just like in my gut
I can feel that that's true but I
haven't changed my diet I was like what
could this be and before I give you the
punchline of what I think it is Tom bill
you here announcing my new espanol
episodes on YouTube and podcasts we are
committed to spreading the impact Theory
message of empowerment at scale to as
many people in our growing Global
Community as possible so we've taken
some of our best It episodes with some
amazing guests and dubbed them into
Spanish language tell your friends and
family start watching Tom bilyu and
espanol muchas gracias be legendary
what when you hear stuff like that where
do you go
well you're the best way to think about
your skin is your the lining of your gut
is actually your skin turned inside out
that's fascinating and so you have from
your mouth all the way down to your anus
a tube that's got the surface area of a
tennis court and everything that you
swallow is actually outside of you
as it's moving through the inside skin
has to do the same functions as the
outside skin and that is keep things
away from us but it's got a fatal flaw
it not only has to keep things out but
it has to let things in like the
proteins and the fats and the sugars
that we eat so that's where the Mischief
can happen but when I see someone with
an external skin problem it's always a
reflection of what's actually happening
in the gut what is that process what
does it look like how can people that
are watching this now if they're
struggling from something how do they
begin that process of repair
so you know I think the first thing you
do is get major lectin containing foods
out of your diet you won't like me for a
couple weeks but most people even within
a couple weeks begin to notice a
difference now what are those they're
foods that we actually evolutionary were
not designed to eat
beans are so lethal raw that there's
very good published studies in humans
that they can cause massive bloody
diarrhea and there's some pretty good
studies in monkeys rhesus monkeys and
red velvet monkeys that they can
actually cause heart disease and even
kidney damage from the lectin content
what's fascinating from a human
evolution standpoint is that humans up
until the dawn of Agriculture were
actually very tall creatures most humans
were about six feet tall and our brain
size was about 15 percent bigger than it
is today
and when if you look chronologically by
8 000 years 2000 years into grain and
bean eating we actually shrunk about a
foot and our brain size has never
recovered from 10 000 years ago so these
are
anti-nutrients grains and beans that's
number one
number two two thousand years ago
northern European cows suffered a
genetic mutation a spontaneous mutation
where they stopped making the normal
protein and milk casein A2 and began
making casein a one
now casein A1 has olectin-like protein
that is converted into a compound called
beta caseiomorphine which can cause a
direct immunologic attack on the beta
cell of the pancreas the insulin
producing cell in the pancreas and
there's some pretty good evidence and
it's accumulating every every year that
one of the causes of type 1 diabetes or
juvenile diabetes is casein A1 milk and
it actually correlates very well
in countries that have casein A1 cows
they have much higher incidence of type
1 diabetes than countries that have
casein A2 cows
cheeses for instance are safe from
France Italy and Switzerland sheep goats
and water buffalo are all caseinate too
and what is it about that that's so
problematic it actually makes a it's a
lectin-like compound that stimulates an
immune response so just as I would get
from the beans or whatever I'm mixing
you'll get the same thing okay so it's a
it's a very new addition to our diet now
the newest addition to our diet
is some of our most precious foods are
American North American or South
American foods for instance in the
nightshade family potatoes eggplant
peppers tomatoes and Goji berries so the
the nightshades the peel and the and the
seeds have the lectins and Native
American Indians in the southwest always
peel and de-seed their peppers they Char
their peppers they de-seed them and then
they either grind it into chili or eat
them that way but they always do that
the
Italians always peel and de-seed their
Tomatoes before they make sauce and is
this like a cultural intuition kind of
thing where they when I what I like to
do is I go around the world studying
cultures and figuring out why did they
do this how did they detoxify lectins
for instance rice was invented 8 000
years ago four billion people use rice
as their staple yet four billion people
take the hall off of rice and eat it
white and surely there can't be four
billion dumb people who don't know any
better that white rice is bad for them
and brown rice is good for them in fact
they've been taking the hall off of rice
for 8 000 years
same way believe it or not up until
William William and Harvey Kellogg in
the early 1900s did the idea that whole
grains were good for us and if you look
back 50 years
and when the whole grain goodness really
caught on you'll notice that a lot of
our current health issues including this
epidemic of autoimmune disease didn't
occur this epidemic of dementia didn't
occur and so whole grains are one of
those wonderful myths that got
perpetrated by a few individuals the
other individual that perpetrated this
English surgeon by the name of Dr
Burkett
and Dr Burkett did some missionary work
in Africa in the middle of the sen of
the last century and he is a colon
surgeon a guy who would operate on colon
cancers and he went down there to do
some work and nobody had colon cancer he
actually went around and watched and
looked at the bowel movements of these
Africans who were eating huge amounts of
tubers things like yams for instance or
celerac root or jicama and their bowel
movements were huge and he goes wow you
know look at all they're eating all this
fibrous stuff and it must be that the
fiber in their diet is keeping them from
having colon cancer
so he came back to England and he
espoused the fiber theory of preventing
cancer
now the problem is in England they
didn't have a lot of these sorts of
tuberous foods but they had tons of
what's called insoluble fiber in the
form of wheat and rye and barley and
even oats so he didn't know the
difference between insoluble fiber and
soluble fiber and so he said we should
all be eating fiber and so that's
actually where that whole idea that the
hall was actually good for you now the
ironic thing is he actually died of
colon cancer
that is very ironic very ironic there's
a saying among surgeons that we always
die from the disease we treat so
well then so that there's so many
interesting points in there talk to me
about how animal Meats end up because
you don't eat hardly any
um how how does lectin find its way into
animal meat we raise animals with
antibiotics and this was discovered by
by accident years ago when they were
thinking that antibiotics might be
needed for crowded conditions of you
know Stockyard animals but the
researcher found out that by giving
antibiotics to these animals they grew
faster and got fatter much quicker than
the animals who didn't get the
antibiotics so it was approved by the
Department of Agriculture and the FDA to
give antibiotics to animals for the
purpose of growth
those what we didn't know is that those
residual antibiotics are incorporated
into the meat the beef the chicken the
pork you name it and so we actually
every time we ingest Factory raised
meats or even farm-raised fish ingest
micro doses of antibiotics
micro doses of antibiotics are
incredibly effective at killing off your
microbiome
so in the last 40 years we've had this
you know
incredible you know the the worst storm
that could possibly happen for our
microbiome and for our leaky gut
so then our lectins their elect and like
substances in the meat but is there
actually lectin itself great question
there was just a paper published from
Ohio State a few weeks ago that shows
that lectins and soybeans can be found
in the meat of animals that you feed
them to now I used to think that this
was kind of fanciful in the alternative
medicine world you know you are what you
eat but you are with the thing you're
eating ate and as I started seeing more
and more autoimmune patients
we had case reports
of particularly there's a woman
psychologist in La that I talk about in
the book who had horrible lupus it was
on Two drugs and we got her off of all
her drugs by following this program
and her her lupus cleared she had rashes
and she she came back to see me and she
said you know everything's great but
I've got this eczema this little rash on
my upper eyelids and so we're going
through the list I said well something's
getting into you and we get to
pasture-raised chicken and I said now
you're you're eating past your raised
chicken cheese oh yeah I eat organic
free-range chicken all the time it's my
go-to food I said
free-range chicken and she said yeah
yeah you know organic free range they
said well the federal government in 2007
passed a law that says you can keep
000 chickens in a warehouse feed them
organic corn and soybeans and not let
them out of the warehouse except open a
door for five minutes every 24 hours and
the chicken has the potential to go
outside and that is the current
government definition of organic
free-range chicken wow so she was eating
the lectins of soybeans and corn in the
chicken that she was eating I trained in
London England for children's heart
surgery and my kids were four and six
years old
and they missed Kentucky Fried Chicken
terribly and a Kentucky Fried Chicken
opened in London now in those days there
was so much fish available in England
that the chickens were fed ground up
fish meal and the the chicken breasts
were actually translucent like fish
and uh so you know we go to Kentucky
Fried Chicken they both grab a drumstick
and they bite it under the drumstick and
my four-year-old goes oh oh you tricked
us this is fish ooh this isn't chicken
and I'm going oh no no no no look you
know drumstick you know Colonel Sanders
that's chicken no it's fish well she was
right it wasn't a chicken it was
a chicken with feathers that was
actually a fish
so we have to realize that our chickens
are no longer chickens they're an ear of
corn with feathers Americans are 70
percent carbon atoms from corn a
substance that we were never exposed to
until 500 years ago Europeans are five
percent corn in fact France in 1900
banned corn as unfit for human
consumption wow
so what I want people to do is is eat
and party like it's 9
999 years ago before we started all this
mess
and when we do that with people and
teach them how to do it
it's amazing what happens to them well
let's talk about that because if I had
only heard some headlines about you I
would have thought oh red meat I'll get
after it because I eat a ton of red meat
and think I'm doing healthy things so
you don't eat a lot of meat why not so
we found that there was a molecule a
sugar molecule
on the wall of pig blood vessels that's
totally different from the sugar
molecule that's in ours but it differs
by only one actually atom and it's new
it's called new 5gc in pigs cows and
lambs and we carry what's called new 5ac
and I have nothing against red meat but
if you look statistically the red meat
eaters do have significantly more
coronary heart disease and significantly
more cancer now why cancer well it turns
out that cancers tumors in humans use
new 5 GC to Shield themselves from
detection by the immune system the
problem is we don't manufacture new 5gc
nor can a can cancer cell which means
they acquired it from external sources
namely beef laminate Port now fish
doesn't carry it they have the same
molecule that we do and chicken have the
same molecule that we do so I urge
people if they're going to eat animal
protein and I I do to use wild shellfish
or wild fish as their main source of
animal protein do I eat meat yeah I mean
do I eat beef I do but I get grass fed
and grass-finished beef and I use it as
As a treat not as a Mainstay of my diet
when you were working with Dr Phil you
guys tried to take over a town yes and
that the the results were something this
is so fun this is all the stuff that I
never get to talk about so we're gonna
pull back the curtain now and you know
some of these things that you try to do
on TV that are just an epic fail the
whole idea was back during the weight
loss challenge days and they decided to
take over a town so they send me in and
what they've done is they've gone in
ahead of time and they have taken over
the high school now they got the mayor
on board the mayor thought this was a
great idea but he didn't kind of check
in with the whole town on what do you
think about this right and so they go
into the high school and what they did
was they just removed all of the fast
food and they removed the kids favorites
like french fries cookies they pulled it
all out so they took the french fries
and they did a swap now I love swaps but
if I was going to swap a french fry My
First Choice wouldn't be a carrot stick
no one's fooled there right so they did
all of this and then I get into town and
they go okay here's what we're gonna
have you do
we're gonna have you go to the high
school and you're going to sit down with
the kids these are a bunch of teenagers
and we have you talk to them about
nutrition
and what they're going to do right they
wanted me to sit down and explain why
we'd replace the french fries with the
carrot sticks and why we replace the the
desserts with the fruit and how great
this was going to be for them and you
can imagine what this was like I was
like this little lamb just thrown to
slaughter with all of these very angry
teenagers what were they saying we don't
understand why we don't care we don't
care right I mean they didn't care they
didn't care that eating french fries was
bad for them because I mean when you're
a teen you can't you're not selling
Health to a teenager
so you've got to meet them where they
are right so for a teenager what are
they going to do maybe they want to be
like one of the rock stars or one of the
big athletic stars but they really don't
care if they're not thinking about the
heart attack they're going to not have
when they're 60.
right they want the french fries and
this is something I've thought a lot
about like
one with what we were trying to do with
Quest was I didn't feel like I could
convince people to
um make a lot of change of behavior our
whole thing was how do you leverage
Behavior but if you have kids and your
kids are facing that kind of I won't
even call it peer pressure but you walk
into the school there's a lot of fast
food the fast food companies of course
are making sure that that's available in
the schools in some cases like how do
you appeal to them if they want to be
you know the rock star of the school
they're not thinking about the avoiding
so send in the athlete or the pop star
that they want to be like like what they
shouldn't have done is sent me in they
should have sent in someone like that
and been aspirational and let them
co-create
what they need to do to have a life like
that and get their buy-in and their why
I used to be a spokesperson for Subway
and I remember I got one of one of the
doctors who I worked with was like I
can't believe you're going to be a
spokesperson for Subway you know it's
it's fast food I go Americans eat fast
food so if I can work with them to make
that fast food healthier and start to
shift some behaviors that they're
already going to do but we can help them
do them better great they're going to go
and get energy bars if we can get them
to get a better choice than so many of
them they're just adult candy bars great
because you just got to have one foot
after the next right I mean I I was
doing something on a Home Shopping
Channel I go I couldn't say the names
but I had Almond Joy and mounds and they
had the same amount of sugar as a Clif
Bar and I think it might have been the
Luna Bar I was like are you kidding me
that was literally our marketing message
was it's the first protein bar that's
not a candy bar in Disguise which is
crazy and you talk a lot about sneaky
sugars and the way that people hey don't
understand necessarily uh they're eating
and B that a lot of this stuff is just
getting into our diet in ways that we
wouldn't expect so what are some of the
areas that people should really be
watching out for that they might not
expect has sugar in it yes so I love
this quote from Dr Mark Hyman who said
our number one recreational drug of
choice is sugar and it's true and so why
are we sneaking sugar into all these
Foods because then we'll want more of
them
and so that's why the manufacturers are
doing it in places that you wouldn't
expect it used to be turn of the century
we ate five pounds of sugar per person
per year
it's now gosh was 150 pounds of sugar
per person per year we're eating like
basically our weight in sugar and the
Obesity rates have gone from point five
percent to over now we're more obese and
overweight so over 30 it's because of
these things sneaking in and the biggest
crime is them sneaking in and in with
the marketing messages to make it look
like it's healthy so take apple juice
concentrate we're all concerned about
high fructose corn syrup but apple juice
concentrate has more fructose than high
fructose corns here but yet you can put
it onto a label and say no sugar added
right doesn't this make you insane and
put it on like a kid's food or one of
those silly fruit snacks or one of the
yogurts say no sugar added
and then everybody thinks it's okay the
sauces those silly salad dressings I
mean when we went fat free back then it
was everything we got to get the fat out
of everything and all of a sudden you
were eating all this sugar but it was
okay because fat makes you fat yeah I
remember literally so I was at roughly
this time I was writing and I used to
keep this big tub of Red Vine licorice
and I remember saying to my friend
because she was like you know I I think
if you eat too much sugar it turns to
fat and I was like that doesn't even
make sense that literally didn't make
sense to me I was like how's that
possible how does sugar become fat I
don't even understand so yeah I was
totally bought into that I was too I
used to eat six meals a day I used to go
from client to client to client and I
would go I had my frozen yogurt store
and then I would go to Il Fornaio and
get a skinny latte and a because I had a
fat-free milk right of course and I'd
get like a baguette and I would just eat
all day long carbs yeah because I was
starving
so talk to me about the drug-like effect
of this stuff like why why is it so hard
for people to let go of this because I
think that the reason that it's in the
supply the way that it is is because we
love it and we want it and it's
essentially people are serving up what
we're asking for well and then we're
also giving it to them and then we want
it you know it's it's like which came
first right and so if you look at so
they did the cool study on rats where
they looked at the reward center of the
brain and when rats were first given in
um I think like some kind of morphine
and when they gave their rats morphine
it lit up displeasure Center the reward
center in their brain then they gave
them Oreo cookies
it lights up the same pleasure Center in
the brain and then they gave them the
choice
and they chose the Oreo cookies
but if you think about it you've got
gluten dairy and sugar together that
Trifecta of an opiate-like effect on the
brain so you start out and you have a
little bit of it and there's a couple
different ways we become addicted to
Sugar one is genetics I mean we have
some people I am genetically not I don't
have a sweet taste a sweet tooth I'm so
thrilled about that now my adopted
mother does so she applied me with sugar
all growing up but at age 12 I just quit
I don't like it like I do not have a
sweet tooth but you can get one because
exposure equals preference you can train
it but then you also get that hit you
know to the pleasure center of the brain
and also it boosts serotonin and if
you're stressed out if you're stressed
out you are actually going to deplete
serotonin and then you're going to want
more sugar to boost it on up and then
you also change your gut microbiome
so when you change your gut microbiome
become more glucose intolerant so now
you're going to need more sugar for fuel
because your body can't access stored
fat for fuel so you start to get this
whole like Compound Effect of like
what's really going on well these all
these factors start to create the
problems
so how do we begin to back out of that I
know you've talked a lot about
um or worked with people I should say
with getting sugar out of their diet how
to deal with that you talked about some
of the replacement stuff that there are
smarter Replacements and carrot sticks
for French fries but what is some of
that stuff for somebody watching now
that's really tried they want to they've
got the intent but they just don't know
what to do how do you think everybody I
mean no one sits and goes you know I
think I'm gonna eat really crappy that's
what I'm going to do that'll be perfect
you know I think we all want to eat
healthier but then we try to do too big
of a change and we fail and then we go C
it's my jeans I'm getting older so give
me an example change well french fries
to carrot sticks I'm not going to eat
any sugar I'm going to quit it all cold
turkey the reason I tackled sugar and I
never intended to the first thing I
started with because I'm kind of
obsessed with you being your own
personal health detective and being able
to connect the dots between how you feel
and what you're eating I think we've
divorced ourselves from that with so
many of these different programs there
is no diet that's right for everybody
it's really about looking at your you
know where you are your outcomes you
want your lifestyle you have your
genetics your epigenetics and going all
right what outcome do I want right now
and I think diets help you learn what
works for you and what doesn't work for
you so I write The Virgin Diet about
testing these seven foods to see which
works for you and which doesn't and one
of them was sugar and the only reason I
put sugar in there because it wasn't in
there at first yes this is what's really
funny I was doing that online with
thousands of people
and because I was teaching doctors how
to use food sensitivity testing in their
office and the same Foods showed up it
was always gluten and dairy and soy and
corn and eggs and peanuts so I was like
why are elimination diets look so
complicated let's just focus on these
ones but what I found is when I didn't
add sugar
people were just moving over to sugar
and I couldn't think about that because
I'm not a sugar person but I saw it over
and over again and fructose actually can
make your gut more permeable
and artificial sweeteners can disrupt
your gut microbiome so I write The
Virgin Diet I slip sugar in there as one
of the seven and this is like the Uproar
I can quit those six I can't can't get
rid of the sugar so all those real Die
Hard sugar addicts were the people I
wrote the sugar impact diet for and what
I did first was I did a little pilot
test because I thought if I can if I can
do this with them then I can do it with
anybody right these are the ones that
have failed these are the ones that are
self-proclaimed I'm a sugar addict I
can't handle it and so the first thing I
did was I went to Amazon because I'm
like why have there been so many books
written about sugar and yet we still
have the problem what's really going on
in my sense was because we were not
taking people through the transition
from being a sugar burner to a fat
burner we were just trying to like go
here cold turkey and unless you go stick
them at Betty forward this thing's not
going to work that's interesting that
you liken it that hard to addiction do
you really mean that there's that kind
of intense physiological withdrawal oh
yes well because think about it if
you're used to eating sugar and most
people don't even realize where it's
sneaking in again they don't think about
that green drink that they drank that
actually is more sugar than a soda right
because it's a green drink gay for me or
the fruit smoothie or whatever they
don't think about all the places that
kills me the mochas the bars like you
look at a salad where they had the
candied walnuts and then the dried fruit
and then the raspberry vinaigrette
or they went and had Chinese food right
they just load themselves with sugar so
all of a sudden you've got a body that's
used to having incoming sugar throughout
the day and using that for energy and
You Yank It
and if you're insulin resistant it's not
like your body goes okay no I'm just
going to use that fat for a fuel source
I'll go dig it out of the belly that'll
be perfect no it goes where is it and
you start to feel crappy and so what
happens when you start to feel crappy
and lotion you know low blood sugar
you're not going to go wait it out
you're going to go get a cookie
so I knew that we had to take people
through a transition from being a sugar
burner to help them becoming a fat
burner and what I did was I rated foods
high medium and low sugar impact not
based on sugar alone but really looking
at fructose separately and then also
looking at how fast carbohydrates turn
into sugar because you know just because
something isn't straight sugar doesn't
mean your body is not turning into sugar
quickly like white bread right so that's
what I did and I tapered from say you
know someone eating white pasta to rice
pasta to spaghetti squash that would be
an example of a taper but over time and
then the other thing is I love adding
before I take away
interesting
when you think about it in most diets
what do they tell you to do okay take
this out take this out take this out and
the minute someone says you can't have
that I'm like obsessed thinking about it
but if you start with telling them
listen I want to make sure you're
getting clean protein in each meals some
good healthy fats foods with a lot of
fiber that Trifecta for good blood sugar
balance because that's really the key to
everything you crowd out a lot of the
crap so that's kind of Step One
that's really interesting now thinking
back to one thing that you said that
really surprised you and it certainly
surprised me when you told me is with
all the people that you've worked with
when you asked like why is it that why
do you think you struggle with losing
weight the answer that people gave you I
found really really interesting what was
it that they told you how do you know
this stuff oh my goodness dive deep into
the world oh wow I'm wondering what else
you know
yeah this was a shocker because I
literally thought with everything that I
do when I asked my community what if
you're not where you want to be with
your weight why not I figured they go
it's sugar you know or I can't give up
my bread or my cheese and that was not
it when we asked people it was because
they didn't feel worthy they didn't feel
good enough
so we've got to always go back and start
with people as to like why do you want
to do this why are you important enough
why is this matter before you start to
try to change things for them and with
them and how do you then deal with that
like how do you help people through that
because you're
there's a reason you've endured there's
a reason that you've been around in such
a potent force in this industry for so
long and I think it's because you sit at
this intersection of really
understanding the the realities of the
biological responses and neurochemistry
and everything of what we eat but you
also understand mindset so one I'd love
to know how you help those people and
then I'd love to hear the just
absolutely astonishing story of how you
really developed this
um mother Warrior mentality that you
have so I think maybe it's just because
also I just haven't quit you know right
because it's a big part of it is just
continuing to show up
um I'm obsessed with how to help people
get results I mean it was it was
actually very early on when I was a
personal trainer back then people were
hiring me because they wanted to lose
weight
and I was like well you know you can't
exercise out exercise a bad diet like so
exercise is important for maintaining
your weight and for shifting kind of
your body's
um
hormonal responses we didn't even know
about hormones and exercise back then
but I I knew intuitively that if you had
more muscle that it wasn't about doing
Bunches of cardio that if you had more
muscle it would shift things I didn't
understand it also helps with insulin
sensitivity but I I knew that diet was
key but what I started to see above that
that was crazy was and I remember I had
this one woman who I helped her and she
was getting so lean and fit and healthy
and her husband didn't dig it that's
interesting he was threatened oh I saw
this happen now multiple times and so
she went right back to where she was and
then I started to watch people as they
started to lose weight and get healthier
if they didn't really believe that's was
their self-image they started to shift
back
so you still you have to work on who do
you want to be you know who are you what
what's your vision for yourself
then you start to take the steps as to
how to get there and you have to be so
clear on that in fact we had this woman
who ate ice cream bars all the time but
she like literally every hour she'd
gastric bypass but she would eat ice
cream bars every hour because she'd fill
up her pouch otherwise so she would wake
up all night long and eat ice cream bars
every hour okay crazy
to ice cream bars but here's what I did
she remembered herself as this lean
healthy fit woman she remembered when
she used to be there
and I was like let's get that picture we
actually took a picture of her back when
she was that way and put it I put on an
ice cream stick and I put it in the
freezer in front of the ice cream bars
you know I was like when you open that
think about you know because they can't
exist together you got to pick the one
right you've got to remember who you are
and then operate from that so I think
we've got to go back to getting really
clear on the Y with whatever we want to
accomplish in life and then make sure
that we're taking steps in that
direction if you start to go this way
grab out that picture again to remind
yourself of who you are and where you're
going I've never heard anybody talk
about it as clearly as you with
um bivalve foods and yeah
some of the the things that we can do
that are Seafood based and then also
you're sort of putting it in historical
context of we probably didn't come up on
the grasslands and I'd love to hear more
about that and sort of how that led you
to realizing that there's potential big
benefits to Seafood
okay thank you that's a great question
Tom I think quickly it's just the notion
of nutrient density meaning what
nutrients are you getting for the
calories you're eating if if calories
make us you know fat as a doctor I was
confronting that a lot or obese right we
want fewer of those well we still need
all the nutrients for our brain then
I'll just data started coming out about
the omega-3 fats when I was a resident
we're all like talking about fish oil
and I was kind of into integrative stuff
and I didn't eat fish and anytime I see
something kind of like with you I was
like and it and I said where'd all these
fish oil Omega-3s come from like they
obviously come from fish
all right well if I'm I'm gonna be like
a brain healthy guy and eat this way and
I'm a low-fat vegetarian I need to add
in this disgusting food Fish seafood so
I slowly added this in living in New
York because you realize well you're on
a coast and I had all these friends who
were chefs and I and I really started
finding ways that I liked seafood and
the reason is that nutrient density when
we think about brain health comes down
to B vitamins magnesium iron we did a
research study a really small study that
I did with Dr Laura LaChance who's also
a psychiatrist where we just said if we
look at all the literature what are the
12 nutrients that are most important for
brain health and specifically depression
that's the most debilitating disease
like does something stand out and there
are 12 nutrients that had really as we
went through like levels of evidence
significant data of both epidemiological
studies but also clinical trials we took
those 12 nutrients and I think this is
the most important thing people Miss we
turn them into food we ask what foods
have the most of these nutrients and you
mentioned bivalves so usually with these
scales like the Andy the aggregate
nutrient in density index it's all
plants because plants always have fewer
calories and I didn't like that because
98 of people eat meat or seafood and I
was curious so we listed all the plants
and then what you'd expect lots of leafy
greens and rainbows but in the animals
three of the top five are bivalves
muscles clams and oysters we're talking
about that scale these are things that
contain the 12
um the key nutrients they could they
contain the most they're the foods with
the most of these 12 nutrients so I know
that number one on the plants is
watercress which is really uh you know
kind of leads for leafy greens but so
are all lettuces kale uh collards kale
it's like number 12 or 15. red peppers
pomelo and so that's the way I get to
these Foods is through nutrient density
that then leads us to food categories
and so the bivalves in Seafood are a
food category because they're the most
concentrated and only source of
long-chained omega-3 fats the omega-3
fats we make them in our liver a little
bit when we eat plant omega-3 fats but
there's reasonable data especially when
you think thing like the pregnancy data
like women who eat more fish their
babies tend to have like higher verbal
IQs and less babies
yeah nine verbal IQ points if you feed
pregnant women if you give them salmon
um there have been some really I'd love
to do a hardcore data Deep dive with you
because I'm really curious what you
think about the studies but there's a
variety of data that if you feed kids
pregnant moms and individuals more
Seafood you see lower rates of
depression in bipolar disorder actually
one of the first studies in nutritional
Psychiatry looked around the world that
intakes of seafood and found that
cultures that eat more Seafood have
lower rates of bipolar illness do you
what the mechanism is going on there is
it just the brain and starve for Quality
fat or no I would well I would say that
let's think about the functions of those
pets EPA structural fat but also like
the 007 fat because it functions to
create all these things called resolvins
and neuroprotectins which that just
sounds good I want more of that like
resolving that inflammation and
neuroprotectin like that's literally
what they do DHA against structural fat
about seven to eight percent of dry
weight of the human brain is DHA it's
the longest fat you eat and then EPA is
more functional EPA is kind of it is
like aspirin when you take a lot of EPA
you increase your bleeding time as we
said in my first book the happiness diet
happiness diet it makes your blood kind
of silky smooth so less clotting less
inflammatory response and EPA ecosa
pentanoic acid gives rise to ecosinoids
the cosinoids are they're like the
um I don't know the specialist agents in
our immune system right where they
they're like snipers they they basically
regulate the immune response and it's
more specific than other inflammatory
factors the um that come from the Omega
uh six fats which are more like the SWAT
team are more like the Marines where
like we're gonna save you but there's
gonna be a big mess and and so that's
where we always say wild salmon right or
fish oil pill but part of making this
list of foods and other things on there
are wild Meats organ Meats is to kind of
create a conversation it's not like you
got to eat all these foods and and then
to do the shift into what are called
food categories whether you eat
Watercress or kale or arugula or
collards eat leafy greens so I don't
know how familiar you are with Dr Alan
goldhammer he's probably the most
extreme dietitian I've spoken to and he
talks about getting people all the way
down to a diet that includes he prefers
pure vegan
and no oil no salt no sugar and he's the
first person I've heard sort of be anti-
olive oil
what's your name again especially olive
oil
what's my take on Extreme veganism I
think that in terms of olive oil and
salt I'll tell you this salt like
cholesterol like saturated fat is a real
red herring
for people who are eating salt from the
salt shaker and eating Natural Foods the
only thing you need to worry about is
getting enough salt
for people who are eating processed
foods we're at 95 of sodium consumption
in America comes from right that's where
it comes from
it's things like tortilla shells it's
things
um uh you know it's in everything it's
in soda so these so that's where I come
down on salt and the reason it's an
issue is we have so much obesity we have
so much high blood pressure and diabetes
that and people are eating processed
foods in terms of olive oil I just
really think the folks who are pushing
the extreme low-fat diet probably that
thing you're talking about how kind I am
I struggle with that sometimes because I
think there are a lot of people who
aren't clinicians who don't see patients
I'm not saying this doctor is one of
them and who don't understand the
implications of their very harsh
inaccurate and not evidence-based advice
and it's where I really have always been
in a milieu that if you're going to say
a food help somebody with a serious
illness like depression or heart disease
like you need to have some evidence
behind you other than just our clinical
experience so I think it's hard to prove
that consumption of fats is bad for
human health I haven't seen that in the
data I've seen no data that also olive
oil separates out in any way I've
certainly seen data that trans fats and
man-made fats are bad I think saturated
fats are a big family of fats that do a
lot of things like they have antibiotic
properties how does that affect our
microbiome the same thing as those
phytonutrients like
I'm not sure it's just all the fiber and
all that stuff we're also taking in all
these really interesting antibacterial
and antiviral compounds when we eat
plants and those certainly shape our
microbiome that's actually you know we
all say blueberries and blackberries
work by like
um you know anthocyanins are so good for
the brain
nature published a study that
anthocyanins pruned the gut
and lead to changes in the gut that lead
to changing and kind of Serotonin
Dynamic dynamics that lead to the
changes in the brain that it's not like
the anthocyanins are up here it's that
they're working down in the gut and so I
was going to ask do you do microbiome
testing when you have somebody coming to
you
yeah I do this really really Advanced
medical procedure or I ask them what
they eat
and when you tell me what you eat and a
little bit about your medical history
it's not a hundred percent but it
certainly accurate in the sense that it
doesn't change it we only look at tests
if it's going to change our
recommendation and
um so I don't test microbiome what I
want to hear is diversity of plants and
what fermented foods do you eat
and if if I don't hear anything about
that I'm going to try and add those in
gently and then it I think sometimes
like a month probiotic supplement is an
interesting idea as I say in the book
and I say throughout all my work you
can't have good brain health without
good gut health but I think that again
this is the kind of thing that gets a
little
I would say manipulated right where
people as opposed to turning to food and
things that they can do there's this
idea we need an expensive test and lots
and lots of probiotics and
I don't know it kind of it goes back to
that connection thing like the
microbiome of the soil leads to the
microbiome of the the plant right like
sauerkraut I remember the first time I
made sauerkraut it reminded me of this
lesson in medical school when they're
telling that bacteria was everywhere all
over every surface of everything and I
looked down and like every medical
student looked down they look at our
hands and and the you know the professor
Mark bronze her smiled and he's like
that's right you're covered in a layer
of bacteria too it's everywhere and like
how you make sauerkraut you just chop up
a cabbage and all the bacteria that are
naturally on there fermented and you
know it's sort of a that's this
interesting release like interesting
cycle between us and the bugs
all right so I want to get into that
cycle now so you're somebody who was
living in New York thriving practice
um did does one of your parents have
um
signs of cognitive decline did I
understand that correctly yeah I mean
that's yeah both of my parents I mean
both my parents are in their 80s and and
definitely there's some there's been
some cognitive decline on on uh uh on
both ends so you move in to their Farm
in Indiana and now from what I hear
you're not going back to New York after
years of living on the farm you're now
going to Wyoming so I'm running this
romantic notion in my head if you take
the kids out of the big city they're on
the farm they're more connected they
know the neighbors they're out playing
in the dirt they're everybody's feeling
better you're feeling more connected to
Nature yes you're covered in scratches
and scars but man like being there
working with your hands being around the
animals making your own like you know
goat's milk kefir and all that and
you're just like we can't ever go back
and now we're gonna you know find
something maybe that's a little closer
to a small City but we still want to
keep this lifestyle is that actually
what happened because you
I think you have to talk about your
horse I think what you described is why
I moved out of the city is accurate in
what I experienced
um I was living in New York with my uh
wonderful wife and two wonderful kids
and living in this kind of box to box
great Urban existence I rode my one
speed bicycle at a Sprint through
Central Park on my way to work in a
beautiful Upper West Side building where
I have a great office and we have a
great network of friends and and all the
stuff that New York offers and something
was just not feeling right I don't know
how to describe it I started going back
to the farm more on the Summers I
started really as you try and do that
and you're not there every day it's hard
to farm and garden it's just an everyday
thing it's a it's a meditative process
in a real way that
I don't know how to describe it it's
just you really like you have to check
in every day and there are many things
like that anymore than like email and
and I think there is also something
about the natural Rhythm that with the
kids and my own kind of stress level
again not that there's anything wrong
with raising kids in a city it just you
know the part that really pushed it for
me Tom is I got tired of shushing my
children
because children are supposed to make
noise and I love the noise they make I
love all the songs I love the screams
and the idea that I as a parent with
guys like some random neighbor
downstairs is upset that I have children
I just couldn't handle that anymore I
felt oppressive and so I did find all of
that in the country and and he asked
about my horse and and my my horse my
daughter Stern as we moved to the
country started riding I'd owned horses
since I was a kid I've always loved
horses and and
um and then if she started writing um it
was nice I went to my horse shows and
and then when the pandemic hit and it
was pretty emotional and I'm seeing lots
of patients I I my wife started writing
and really and she hadn't written much
and was I would say nervous and scared
and it really did something for her and
just emotionally and then I started
writing and I'd written as a kid who had
never been like with a like a real
trainer to really teach you how to ride
a horse within a few months I'm like
jumping a horse over two two and a half
feet like jumps and you go from this
like being scared to having some I would
say Mastery but just being challenged
and then it's like a lot of things I do
like surfing and snowboarding it it
really is feeling kind of a flying where
you hit this really altered state where
you in this animal are kind of in this
space and where you're thinking I love
about it like you're thinking about how
much your little toe is cramping and
hurts or that the Canter is like a
little bit like wonky and you don't know
why you know I don't think we can
discover that without time out outside
of the city we both love so it was a
place I put myself to go between these
two contrasting worlds is I I guess I
wondered the question you're wondering
what if it's great for me what in my
family what about what what does it feel
like what do I learn there
yeah it's interesting man
um I've really enjoyed getting to know
your work and your thoughts and now
certainly getting to ask you things
directly there's
I see you as a Vanguard of what I think
we may have to do to unwind
uh where people are mentally right now
and I'll lay it out as I see you and you
tell me if I'm sort of on the path here
um
obviously I love cities and cities have
brought us both a lot of things I love
modern living it's brought us a lot of
things I even love social media it's
brought me a lot of things including
tremendous business success but I also
see that there's a downside to that and
that social media can be outright
dangerous that City living has so
obscured a historical or traditional way
of life where we have literally
developed genetically to be in that kind
of environment and we're now once
removed
and you look at skyrocketing depression
you look at skyrocketing anxiety you
look at
um you know a lot of the sort of
pathologized things that that there is a
beautiful side to but there's also the
potential for it to spill into the
pathological and seeing people who are
successfully unwinding that sounds a lot
like what you do Whole Food first and
foremost
making sure that you're eating diversity
managing for the microbiome steering
what you eat by how you feel
psychologically which is something that
I think until this movement of
nutritional Psychiatry came along was
such a disconnect and people had no
sense of how the two things come
together and so when we before we
started rolling and you joked and said
that your psychiatrist was a little
jealous of your horse and you were
joking of course but saying like you
know I get more out of my horse and I
thought there's probably truth in that
joke of Joe just you're you're doing
something that makes you to use your
words feel more connected to use my word
more grounded tell them I really I think
it means that we want to continue the
conversation I'm really curious about I
feel like we have a similar set of
questions because I think there is
there is going to be a revolution
I think and how we're living I think uh
in terms of really people who are
wanting to optimize their health not
wanting to squeeze in a two-week
vacation someplace nice in the Sun but
to live a life where there's more nature
and more exercise and more groundedness
and connectedness and I think the
pandemics really accentuated that I
think food is one of those pieces of it
that we have a lot of control over it's
why I like it as a factor in mental
health I think it's where it's different
than our other treatments right whether
Prozac works for you or Zoloft or
lithium like we're both crossing our
fingers when I prescribe those that they
work and they do for a lot of people and
they don't for some people same thing
with Psychotherapy uh uh and you don't
really control that too much a little
bit but whether food can work for you
whether there's nourishment or whether
there are certain nutrients that your
brain needs that really most Americans
aren't getting you know I think uh
that's one of the things that connects
we're talking about a rural City you
know kind of urban divide one thing
that's interesting is both of those
places have horrible mental health
crises it's not like country living is
like free of depression and anxiety
um and another thing that connects that
is as much as there is a wellness
movement the general American diet in
both of those places is just really
atrocious and damaging to brain health
and so
um but I like that we're ending with
unanswered questions that's always the
sign of a conversation interesting thing
is I think there are a lot of remaining
questions but what I see in you and what
I hope people will take away from this
interview is that there is like there is
you can't just give people a pill right
for the sort of ultimate solution here
but you have very prescriptive things
that people can do you know we've walked
through what they can do with the food
we've walked through some of the things
that they can do with lifestyle and
until you have tried all those My Hope
Is that people don't lose hope I mean I
think that's also the most important
point or and it's just that people don't
lose hope I mean I I I I've treated
people with every type of mental illness
and it's actually what gives me hope is
what gives me strength and resilience
I've just few people who have it uh so
hard with what happens in their minds
and to see them
just do amazing things start companies
have families transcend it get sober
whatever it is for that part it's just
it makes me very hopeful everybody
listening should have hope no matter
where you are whether food helps you or
not or whether you want to eat some of
these Foods or not that there is a path
forward and there's always a passport I
think Tom your story really demonstrates
that of just uh I think oftentimes we
think about Wellness in as a moment in
time and we forget about our own
personal development and evolution
development is one of those words we use
in adolescence and I think we've just
forgotten that so much complex
development happens in adulthood and and
to really honor that and encourage that
in ourselves and in each other and I
hope I hope my book really
pushes people towards that with food you
know not that there's exactly the right
perfect brain healthy diet but for you
there is there are those foods that work
for you they're the foods that hopefully
include some of these power players in
my book like red beans and olive oil and
bivalves and fatty fish that we talked
about and lots of dark chocolate we
didn't talk about dark chocolates one of
my big favorites
um so and I think that does make a
difference it's like that little step
that helps motivate us and keep us going
and Inspire us
I think the fact that regardless of the
type of dementia a person develops they
they give you these these biochemical
Band-Aids
the fact that it seemed so non-specific
to me
made me
just intuitively think you know I had
this I had a theory that there there had
to be a better way
and having a lifelong passion for
nutrition and health just in you know
General in the sense of general fitness
my hunch was that diet and lifestyle may
have had something to to do with this